That is, their behaviour to each other must not be touched by practicality, their virtues must not be of a kind that acknowledges the claims of the world. As soon as mutuality comes in, and common interests, and cooperation, and tolerance, and a concern for each other’s welfare or prestige in the world, the ethos of the family, of marriage, has asserted itself and they lose their status of lovers. Their behaviour to each other must be precisely not what we call “mature”—they must see each other and the world with the imperious absolutism of children. So that a man in the grip of an obsessional lust and a girl of twelve make the ideal couple for a story about love written in our time. At least at the beginning of his love for *Lolita* there are no practical moral considerations, no practical personal considerations, that qualify H. H.’s behaviour. As for Lolita, there is no possibility of her bringing the relation close to the condition of marriage because she cannot even imagine the female role in marriage. She remains perpetually the cruel mistress; even after her lover has won physical possession of her, she withholds the favour of her feeling, for she has none to give, by reason of her age, possibly by reason of her temperament.

Then the novelist must pay due attention to making the lover’s obsession believable and not ridiculous. Nowadays we find it difficult to give credence to the idea that a man might feel that his reason and his very life depended on the response to him of a particular woman. Recently I read *Liber Amoris* with some graduate students and found that they had no understanding whatever of Hazlitt’s obsessive commitment to Sarah Walker. They could see no reason why a man could not break the chains of a passion so unrewarding, so humiliating. I later regretted having been cross at their stupidity when I found myself doubting the verisimilitude of Proust’s account of the relation of Swann to Odette. But our doubts are allayed if the obsession can be accounted for by the known fact of a sexual peculiarity, an avowed aberration. Pathology naturalises the strange particularity of the lover’s preference.

I may seem to have been talking about *Lolita* as if in writing it Mr. Nabokov had undertaken a job of emotional archaeology. This may not be quite fair to Mr. Nabokov’s whole intention, but it does suggest how regressive a book Lolita is, how, although it strikes all the most approved modern postures and attitudes, it is concerned to restore a foredone mode of feeling. And in nothing is Lolita so archaic as in its way of imaging the beloved. We with our modern latitude in these matters are likely to be amused by the minor details of his mistress’s person that caught the lover’s fancy in the novels of the nineteenth century—the expressiveness of the eyes, a certain kind of glance, a foot, an ankle, a wrist, an ear, a ringlet; with our modern reader’s knowledge of the size and shape of the heroine’s breasts, thighs, belly, and buttocks, these seem trifling and beside the point.

Yet the interest in the not immediately erotic details of the female person was not forced on the lover or the novelist by narrow conventions; rather, it was an aspect of the fetishism which seems to attend passion-love, a sort of synecdoche of desire, in which the part stands for the whole, and even the glove or the scarf of the beloved has an erotic value. This is the mode of

H. H.’s adoration of *Lolita*, and against the background of his sexual greed, whfch he calls “ape-like,” it comes over us as another reason for being shocked, that in recent fiction no lover has thought of his beloved with so much tenderness, that no woman has been so charmingly evoked, in such grace and delicacy, as Lolita; the description of her tennis game, in which even her racket has an erotic charm, is one of the few examples of rapture in modern writing.

It seems to me that it is impossible to miss the parti pris in Mr. Nabokov’s archaeological undertaking, the impulse to mock and discredit all forms of progressive rationalism not only because they are stupid in themselves but because they have brought the madness of love to an end. But

Mr. Nabokov is not partisan to the point of being dishonest about the true nature of love. It is H. H., that mixture of ferocity and jocularity, who reminds us that “Love seeketh only self to please... . And builds a Hell in

Heaven s despite.

The passages in which Humbert gives voice to this judgment are not as well done as one might wish; they stand in an awkward relation to the tone and device of the book. Yet perhaps for that very reason they are the more startling and impressive (if we do not read them in a mood which makes them seem to verge upon the maudlin).
