Subsequent to the introduction of Hutcheon’s deﬁnition of postmodern parody, the apt imbrication between parody, the Gothic, and postmodernism—with particular emphasis on the question of subjectivity—and its relevance to the novel are discussed. Lastly, by tracing the protagonist’s ironically degenerative process of becoming a posthuman monster, which is represented through contributive Gothic elements deployed in the setting and characterization of the novel, it will be shown that *Child of God* is a postmodern parody of the humanist tradition of the Bildungsroman. Furthermore, as it will be indicated, the postmodern Gothic nature of the novel undercuts any optimistic vision of the posthuman alternative in the wake of the dissolution of humanist subjectivity.

## The *Bildungsroman* and the humanist tradition

Save for the German origin of the term *Bildungsroman*, virtually every other aspect of the genre has been open to debate. According to Tobias Boes, the term Bildungsroman was ﬁrst coined by a professor of rhetoric called Karl Morgenstern in a lecture entitled

“Concerning the Spirit and Cohesion of a Number of Philosophical Novels” delivered in 1810. The term, however, was discussed in a more systematic manner by Morgenstern in another lecture entitled “On the Nature of the *Bildungsroman*” nine years later (Boes, 2012, p. 1). Nevertheless, it was with Wilhelm Dilthey’s 1870 biography of Friedrich Schleiermacher and his

1906 study *Poetry and Experience* that the term gained traction in modern criticism (Boes, 2006, p. 231). It has been commonly acknowledged that Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s *Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship* (1795) is the “paradigmatic example” of the German *Bildungsroman* or the novel of formation (Boes, 2012, p. 1), which is “linked to *Humanität* as harmonious development of individuality” through “a metamorphoses of role and character” (Ryan et al., 2022). Despite the lack of general consensus as to the speciﬁc deﬁnition of the term, its birth, as Sarah Graham points out, is “deeply implicated with the German Enlightenment” (2019, p. 2). The association with Enlightenment humanism has been noted by Dilthey, who posits that the Bildungsroman is “an aesthetic expression of the Enlightenment concept of *Bildung* and… presents a regulated development of the hero or heroine who has to reach fulﬁllment and harmony by passing through various conﬂicts of life” (Golban 10). Jean Francois Lyotard also points out the intimate relationship between Cartesian philosophy and the Bildungsroman when he notes that in Descartes the legitimacy of science is demonstrated “in a *Bildungsroman*, which is what the *Discourse on Method* amounts to” (1984, p. 29; italics in the original). As for the translation of the word into English, although the “roman” in the word Bildungsroman means “novel,” “bildung” is more elusive and could be translated into English as “formation,” “development,” or “growth” (Graham 2). Nevertheless, as Petru Golban notes, the “novel of development” and the “novel of formation” are the most frequently used English equivalents of the Bildungsroman (2018, p. 8), the latter of which is the one used in this study because of its correspondence to Dilthey’s deﬁnition of the genre. Dilthey’s insistence on the idea of formation is also in tune with Mikhail Bakhtin’s “process of becoming” (1986, p. 23), which he identiﬁes as the focal point of the genre in “The Bildungsroman and Its Signiﬁcance in the History of Realism”

(1936–38). Although this study employs the ﬁve characteristics stated by Dilthey and his deﬁnition of the *Bildungsroman* as “a type of novel that portrayed personal emergence simultaneously as a psychological maturation and social integration” (Graham, 2019, p.