90), it dissents from Dilthey’s insistence on its peculiarity to German literature. It need not be stated that this study also rebuts the claim made by a number of scholars that the novel formation is “primarily a nineteenth-century phenomenon” (Boes,

2006, pp. 230–231).

Although the term “humanism” resists a single uniﬁed deﬁnition, the deﬁnitional framework used in this study focuses on the Western ideal of Man formulated by “Protagoras as ‘the measure of all things’” with bodily normativity and a capacity for mental perfectibility, which constitutes the warp and woof of the humanist conception of subjectivity (Braidotti, 2013, p. 13). While this study refuses to reduce Western humanism to a caricature of the Enlightenment, its focus is mainly on the Enlightenment aspects of the humanist discourse, rather than the primarily pedagogical humanism of the Renaissance. As Tony Davies argues, although some of the notions frequently associated with the tradition of humanism can be traced back to the Renaissance, the term was coined for the ﬁrst time by Enlightenment scholars, such as Friedrich Immanuel Niethammer, in Germany in the nineteenth century (1997, p. 9). Although Davies stresses the protean and elusive nature of the concept, it is possible to demarcate some of its constitutive convictions, which extensively overlap with Enlightenment ideals as one of its phases. According to Rosi Braidotti, humanism “combines the biological, discursive and moral expansion of human capabilities into an idea of teleologically ordained, rational progress” (2013, p. 13).

There is fundamental faith, Braidotti continues, “in the unique, self-regulating and intrinsically moral powers of human reason” embedded in the discourse of humanism (2013, p. 13). In particular, the Cartesian subjectivity enmeshed in the Enlightenment discourse, which Charles Taylor regards as an “epistemological revolution with anthropological consequences” (1977, p. 4), operates as one of the emblems of the doctrine of humanism. The Cartesian subject with its mind/body dualism is predicated on three notions vis-à-vis the subject’s relation to knowledge and the external world, that is to say, the “self-deﬁning, all-knowing, and formally empowered subject of consciousness” comprises the Cartesian subject of humanism (Gandhi, 1998, p. 35). Accordingly, it is easy to discern the imbrication between the thematic concerns of the *Bildungsroman* and such humanist notions as self-acculturation, self-empowering reason, mastery, social integration, and harmony. As Paul Sheehan aptly puts it, the Bildungsroman is “essential to an emplotment of the transactions between the human (humanism, humanitas) and the novel”

(2004, p. 5). Sheehan further argues that If Cartesian individualism gave to the novel a model of subjectivity, Cartesian dualism provided the dilemma that



ARTICLE



only the *Bildungsroman* could overcome: Enlightenment frustration with the relationship between res cogitans

(rational human subjects) and res extensa (lifeless objects, including animals). The ‘solution’ proffered was to see discursive philosophy as a kind of category mistake. It is

ﬁction that can perform this task, not philosophy. (p. 4, italics in the original)

Consequently, “humanistic historicism, conceived as an ideology of perfection through time” (Boes, 2012, p. 157) constitutes

“the logical domain of the novel of formation” (Boes, 2012, p. 150). In a similar vein, Stanley Bates argues that the formation of the *Bildungsroman* somehow “conﬁrm[s] Hegel’s view that a central line of literature will concern the formation and development of individual consciousness in a variety of contingent circumstances. Hence, a character in this kind of literature is both a component and a topic of the work of art” (Bates, 2009, p. 403)