In other words, in this type of literature, “the plot is the character —the representation of ‘how one becomes who one is’” (Bates, 2009, p. 404; italics in the original). Thus, the idea of individual advancement toward a ﬁnal destination constitutive of the *Bildungsroman* concurrently suggests a “universal” rather than a “merely singular telos” (Boes, 2012, p. 19) and is, therefore, inextricably interwoven with the discourse of humanism. Following a discussion of the congruence between the Gothic, postmodernism, and parody, the following section will attempt to demonstrate that “the realization of the self,” particularly in terms of “a sense of who one is, gender distinction, family and professional perspectives, social and interhuman status and role,… communication and behaviour, [and] personal discernment” (Golban, 2018, p. 18) is subverted in *Child of God*.

## *Child of God* as a postmodern Gothic parody of the *Bildungsroman*

As Maria Beville argues in her insightful study of Gothic postmodernism, a link could be forged between the Gothic and postmodernism based on the notion of terror as well as an emphatic concern with (de-centred) human subjectivity.

According to Beville, the terror of the Gothic, “often inherent in its monsters and othered bodies, functions as a deconstructive counter-narrative which presents the darker side of subjectivity, the ghosts of otherness that haunt our fragile selves” (2009, p. 41).

The enunciation of the sublime effects of terror is the “primary function” of both Gothic rhetoric and postmodernist literature, both of which can be perceived as routes to “the unknown, unrepresentable aspects of self and reality” (Beville, 2009, p. 15).

Accordingly, presenting a hybrid mode that “emerges from the dialogic interaction of Gothic and postmodernist characteristics in a given text” (2009, p. 9), Beville contends that the Gothic serves “as the clearest mode of expression in literature for voicing the terrors of postmodernity; a mode that is far from dead and in fact rejuvenated in the present context of increased global terrorism” (Beville, 2009, p. 8). However, as Catherine Spooner points out, the components of the Gothic can be “reordered in inﬁnite combinations, because they provide a lexicon that can be plundered for a hundred different purposes, a crypt of body parts that can be stitched together in myriad different permutations” (2006, p. 156). Thus, unlike Beville who analyses postmodern texts that are characteristically Gothic (2009, p. 10), this study regards *Child of God* as a primarily Gothic text that is embedded in a postmodern context, which, according to Jean Baudrillard, is also “a culture of death” (1993, p. 127). Postmodernism can be regarded as being similarly concerned with “excess, anxiety, fear and death” (Beville, 2009, p. 11). Baudrillard notes, however, that this death does not simply affect “a subject or a body” as “the real event” but is “a form in which the determinacy of the subject and of value is lost” (1993, p. 5). Therefore, in the postmodern world, identity “is untenable: it is death” (Baudrillard, 1993, p. 4). Furthermore, the Gothic “fascination with terror, the negative and the irrational, and its hostility toward accepted codes of reality, place it ﬁrmly in the realm of revolution,” and what makes it more “terrifying is that this revolution is against humanity itself” (Beville, 2009, p. 19). According to Fred Botting, the Gothic “shadow[s] the progress of modernity with counter-narratives displaying the underside of enlightenment and humanist values” (2005, p. 1). In other words, the Gothic “condenses the many perceived threats to these values, threats associated with… imaginative excesses and delusions,… human evil, social transgression, mental disintegration and spiritual corruption” (2005, p.
