The further the narrative advances, the more claustrophobic and primitive the atmosphere of the setting becomes. Following the loss of the relatively civilized house in the ﬁre, the cave, which is the quintessential image of the primitive, the barbaric, and the tabooed, becomes Ballard’s new home. There is a subversive edge to the irony that permeates the image of the cave succeeding that of the ruined house. The irony intimates the “primal wilderness” (Jarrett, 1997, p. 41) lying beneath the rusting patina of postmodern civilization that had been precariously sustained by the image of the ostensibly civilized house before giving way to the veritably primitive cave. In other words, the already crumbling image of civilization collapses into the archetypal image of the cave. This spatial degeneration correlates to its counterpart in characterization. It is “in the bowels of the mountain,” where the convoluted walls were “slavered over… with wet and bloodred mud [and] had an organic look to them, like the innards of some great beast” (p. 102; italics added), that the setting evolves into a double character embodying the extreme alienation and degenerative transformation of the protagonist, who undergoes an ironically regressive rebirth into a cave-dwelling, corpse-hoarding posthuman monster. The ironic rebirth, in turn, parodies the epiphanic sense of regeneration typical of the Bildungsroman.

Toward the end of the novel, the setting occasionally employs the phantasmagorical character of the Gothic as a morbid harbinger of death. At one point in the cave, the setting melds with Ballard’s morbid dream, in which “he was riding to his death” as “each leaf that brushed his face deepened his sadness and dread” (p. 129). The inextricable relationship between Ballard’s stage of degeneration and the setting is once again suggested in the hospital, where he was taken following his assault on John Greer, which resulted in the loss of his arm. In the hospital, Ballard “lay in a waking dream,” as “the cracks in the yellowed plaster of the ceiling and upper walls seemed to work on his brain” (p. 130). His “spindly legs lay pale and yellow looking on the sheet” (p. 132). It is easy to discern that the yellow in the setting, which symbolizes decay, correlates with the yellow of Ballard’s body and mind. The collapse of the setting into more degenerative and claustrophobic spaces continues when Ballard is symbolically interred in “a cage next door but one to a demented gentleman who used to open folks’ skulls and eat the brains inside with a spoon” (p. 145). Even following his death, the space Ballard occupies shrinks as he is shipped to the basement room of the state medical school at Memphis, where he is “ﬂayed, eviscerated, [and] dissected” before being “scraped into a plastic bag” to be taken to a cemetery outside the city reserved for his kind (p. 145). Accordingly, the degenerative setting of the novel is most strikingly manifest in Ballard’s habitation shifts from a passably civilized house to a cave, a cage, the dissection table of a medical school, a plastic bag, and ultimately a remote cemetery. Consequently, instead of progressing toward a better condition of life and successful social integration, which are typically reﬂected in and facilitated by the setting, the Gothic setting of Child of God is subversively degenerative in a way that mirrors both the physical and psychological degeneration of the protagonist. In other words, the Gothic setting in the novel directly contributes to “the ironic inversion” constitutive of the parody at play. Nevertheless, the setting supplements the overriding component of the Bildungsroman, namely, characterization, which comprises the focus of the following section.
