Ballard’s life is crowded with animals. Throughout the novel, he keeps a household with all kinds of animals: spiders, crickets, snakes, dogs, cats, ﬁsh, doves, a robin, and even teddy bears and a stuffed tiger, which he won in a shooting contest at the country fair. At multiple points in the narrative, the narrator blends the protagonist’s subjectivity with animals and beasts using the Gothic element of grotesque exaggeration. Ballard is limned as “a misplaced and loveless simian shape” (p. 20), a “gargoyle,” which represents animal-human hybridity (p. 37), “a crazy winter gnome” (p. 83), “a crazed mountain troll” (p. 114), “a part-time ghoul” (p. 130), and even as an infra-animal “thing” (p. 88, p. 115).

At several points in the novel, Ballard visits a house belonging to a man named Ralph. There he meets a child named Billy, whom the narrator introduces as “a huge headed bald and slobbering primate that inhabited the lower reaches of the house” (p. 60; italics added) and could hardly be perceived as a child (p. 61). Ballard brings a robin for Billy and seems to understand him very well. In fact, the narrative suggests that there is an afﬁnity between Ballard and Billy, whose names also tellingly resemble one another. When Billy chews off the legs of the robin, Ballard remarks understandingly: “He wanted it to where it couldn’t run off” (p. 62). Analogously, Ballard murders people so that they can never run off and keep him company forever. Later on, Ballard observes afﬁrmatively, “Why that boy’s got good sense” (p. 87). It can, therefore, be argued that Billy mirrors the posthuman monstrosity of Ballard.

Accordingly, one of the categories that Ballard undermines is human/beast and human/animal. Another category Ballard problematises is male/female. Apart from animal-like and beastly features associated with Ballard, his gender performance is incrementally blurred when his longtime habit of “wearing the underclothes of his female victims” develops into “appearing in their outerwear as well” (p. 107). The category crisis feeding into Ballard’s monstrosity and becoming posthuman is reasserted when he is described as a “gothic doll in illﬁt clothes, its carmine mouth ﬂoating detached and bright in the white landscape” (p. 107). Subsequently, when he confronts John Greer, Ballard is again “in frightwig and skirts” (p. 127). It will be additionally demonstrated that Ballard’s category crises are also degenerative as he gradually moves through regressive stages of the posthuman: becoming-animal, monster, thing, (living) corpse, and, ultimately, apparition. In that sense, posthumanism is portrayed as a kind of primitivism in the novel. As Austin Lillywhite also notes, like posthumanism, the “primitivist worldview disrupts the traditional Western category of a fully bounded, autonomous, white humanity that is opposed to an inert, passive materiality” (2018, p. 114). Thus, the ulterior logic shared by both “hinges on undoing binaries of inner/outer, person/thing; the result is a crisis of subjectivity, brought on by the desire for… the rank of brute thingness” (Lillywhite, 2018, p. 114). When this primitivism is conceived of as degenerative regression, it becomes a “gothic” discourse (Hurley, 1996, p. 65). The cynical nature of the Gothic, as also reﬂected in McCarthy’s novel, ampliﬁes the desire of the foregoing primitivism for “brute thingness” (Lillywhite, 2018, p. 114) and divests its transgressive tenor of its positive potentialities, suggesting that when primitive impulses and modes of existence remain “unchecked,” humans are apt to “perform acts of perversity than poetry” (Magistrale, 1996, p. 31). In this sense, the primitive regression of the protagonist from the paradigms of humanism into further entrapment in gross materiality and transgressive becoming—in accordance with the posthuman—recasts the process of becoming the liminal posthuman into a violent objectiﬁcation of the subject, which is itself a murderous act. In addition to the foregoing category crises, Ballard’s act of serial killing and his symbolic afﬁnity with corpses is another behaviour linking him to posthuman Gothic monstrosity. In that sense, Ballard recalls Frankenstein’s monster to some extent.
