According to Ashley Craig Lancaster, “McCarthy combines the tradition of the British Gothicism with the realism of American Gothicism to create an updated version of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein” (132). Both Ballard and Frankenstein’s monster, Lancaster continues, are rejected companionship, ostracized by society, and subjected to a “system of social othering” (2008, p. 133), which fuels their process of becoming “degenerate” monsters (2008, p. 142). In particular, Ballard’s social alienation progresses to the point where his communion with animals increasingly lapses into a community of corpses, which seems to echo his own subversively posthuman mode of existence. Ballard takes a step further than Frankenstein’s monster and becomes a thoroughgoing necrophile in addition to being a serial killer. As pointed out by Punter, “Gothic ﬁction is erotic at root,” and sexual perversion is often the corollary of the repressed “Eros,” which “returns in the form of threat and violence” (1996b, p. 191). In Ballard’s case, the deviance involves the corpse, which carries several implications. According to Erin E. Edwards, “the corpse marks the cessation of rationalist control over the body, the moment when the socially deﬁned person is given over to biological forces, and the molar form of the human yields to the molecular processes of decomposition” (2018, p. 3).

As a result, the corpse is bound up in “a retrospective unraveling of the exclusionary category of the humanist subject, even as it imagines what comes ‘after’ this traditionally deﬁned human form” (Edwards, 2018, p. 3). At ﬁrst blush, Ballard’s exploitation of corpses may seem to reafﬁrm the liberal humanist subject’s treatment of the body “as an object for control and mastery rather than as an intrinsic part of the self” (Hayles, 1999, p. 5). This “Gothic commodiﬁcation” characterizing Gothic monstrosity “exploits the disconnect between genuine human connection and the need to control every aspect of the human victim, particularly the body after death” (Coughlin, 2015, p. 143). Nonetheless, Ballard’s underground monstrous dollhouse is a posthuman community intended for catering to his desperate need for companionship and integration. Ballard’s collection of corpses, in Vereen Bell’s terms, consist of “facsimile people” (1988, p. 61) assembled as compensation for Ballard’s social alienation and symbolic or “psychic death” (Jarrett, 1997, p. 44). As Jarrett notes, Ballard’s inhabitation of caves is itself “a form of self-entombment or life-in-death that mirrors the death-in-life of his corpses” (1997, p. 45). In other words, Ballard’s ostensible control over corpses through Gothic commodiﬁcation as a substitute for genuine human connection collapses into the subversion of the category of the humanist subject on account of his own identiﬁcation with the corpse as a symbol of the loss of rationalist control over the body. Death seems to be the only medium through which Ballard can ﬁnd a semblance of integration and companionship. He gradually tries to achieve integration by assembling a grotesque community of corpses, which corresponds to his own symbolic death. It does not stop there, however. Ballard’s dream of “riding to his death” could be construed as “a form of suicide: his inarticulate wish to join his true family composed of his dead father [who had committed suicide] and collection of corpses” (Jarrett, 1997, p. 42). It is only through his actual death that Ballard receives an ironic semblance of social assimilation, which proves to be yet another form of exclusion. In other words, he is temporarily incorporated into society only as a posthuman Other, namely a monstrous corpse, to be “laid out on a slab and ﬂayed, eviscerated, dissected” and after three months of class, “scraped from the table into a plastic bag and taken with others of his kind to a cemetery outside the city and here interred” (p. 145; italics added). Thus, the world of Child of God is a postmodern Gothic world where “the body is turned inside out— actually peeled open—as its organs are splayed, like negative photographic images, across the ﬁeld of a dead, relational power” (Kroker, 1987, p. 185). The Cartesian self implodes into a “dangling” subject in a body that alternates between “the frenzy of the schizoid ego and the inertia of hermeticism” with its organs hanging out (Kroker, 1987, p. 185). 
