The amount of material, given not only the number and variety of texts but their different textual and cultural conditions of production, has necessitated certain omissions in order that particular examples of Gothic writing can be located and analysed in specific contexts. The focus is primarily on Gothic writing in English: there are no discussions of Russian texts, nor of French productions, despite the Gothic elements that appear in some symbolist and surrealist work. In part this is because lines of connection are difficult to trace: the surrealist interest in Gothic texts is indirect, appearing to stem from a deeper fascination with the work of the Marquis de Sade who, in his ‘Reflections on the Novel’, praised Mrs Radcliffe’s and M.G. Lewis’s narratives.

German tales, given the widespread popular association of Gothic with all things gloomy and Germanic, receive only brief attention in references to the influence of German Romanticism, particularly of E.T.A.Hoffman and Ludwig Tieck, on British and American writing. Focusing on particular texts as representative of Gothic developments in the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the discussions of Gothic texts analyse the generic diffusion of Gothic forms, especially in the twentieth century. Moreover, addressing recent or postmodern texts in the light of Gothic features presents uncanny parallels between the 1790s, 1890s and 1990s and facilitates a rereading of the narratives of modernity.

CRITICISM

The approach of this book has been made possible by recent developments and re-examinations in literary, critical and cultural theory. This is not to say, however, that earlier scholarship and critical enthusiasm for Gothic writing has been neglected, far from it. While work of this kind sustained serious interest in forms marginalised, if not forgotten, by canons as curiosities in the history of literary production and consumption, the shift in values and perspectives provided by recent theories has significantly altered attitudes to Gothic texts. By challenging the hierarchies of literary value and widening the horizons of critical study to include other forms of writing and address different cultural and historical issues, recent critical practices have moved Gothic texts from previously marginalised sites designated as popular fiction or literary eccentricity. The questioning of boundaries in recent criticism is highly appropriate to studies of Gothic texts.

This introductory volume draws on the different issues and perspectives informing and structuring critical interpretations and reinterpretations: it is an effect of previous writing, a selective composite of various critical readings which, while referring to no specific critical statement other than those by contemporary reviewers, remains indebted to the history of Gothic criticism. The most informative work on different aspects of Gothic writing and using different approaches is cited in the bibliography.

The following overview will indicate the variety of ways criticism has engaged with Gothic writing, engagements that are clearly affected by changing critical positions. In the early part of the twentieth century, from the 1920s, Gothic writing was discussed as a subgenre, of peripheral interest as part of general literary historical surveys discussing the development of the novel.

Michael Sadleir’s interest was a result of the list of ‘horrid’ novels cited in Jane Austen’s *Northanger Abbey* (1818).