Lester Ballard: a “bedraggled parody”3 of Bildung The Bildungsroman pivots around the identity formation and psychological development of the protagonist. Since it consists of a teleology of individuality as “an ideal type” that “carries with it many assumptions about the autonomy and relative integrity of the self [and] its potential self-creative energies” (Sammons, 1991, pp. 41–42), characterization is arguably its most vital constituent. If the plot and the character are virtually identical in the Bildungsroman (Bates, 2009, p. 404), one can go so far as to argue that the character is the plot. Thus, in order for the “critical ironic distance” of parody (Hutcheon, 2000, p. 34) to work in the novel, it needs to target characterization above all. Similarly, in Child of God, postmodern parody operates chieﬂy through Gothic lineaments in characterization. Through postmodern parody as “the [concurrent] inscription of continuity and change” (Hutcheon, 2000, p. 36), the novel depicts the life and becoming of Ballard in imitation of the 6 typical Bildungsroman but with ironic critical distance ﬁnessed by the Gothic, which undercuts “the humanistic concept of the shaping of the individual self from its innate potentialities through acculturation and social experience” (Sammons, 1991, p. 41).  Instead of approximating to the ideal Man, the protagonist is portrayed as becoming a monster, which the novel equates with the posthuman. There is a relatively implicit congruence between the Gothic and the posthuman, which Child of God vehemently underscores in order to vent the horrors of the postmodern world.

At the heart of the Gothic resides “materialism without transcendent anchor” (Hurley, 1996, p. 9), which “discloses bodies as partial and plural categories rather than deﬁnite objects” (Botting, 2019, p. 241). Along similar lines, what is meant by the posthuman here corresponds to Cary Wolfe’s conceptualization of posthumanism as the condition of being mired in corporeality as opposed to the humanist insistence that “‘the human’ is achieved by escaping or repressing not just its animal origins in nature, the biological, and the evolutionary, but more generally by transcending the bonds of materiality and embodiment altogether” (2010, xv). If we add Jeffrey Jerome Cohen’s monster theory to the equation, the overlap between Gothic monstrosity and the posthuman becomes more striking. According to Cohen, the monster is “the harbinger of category crisis” (1996, p. 6) and “stands at the threshold of becoming” (1996, p. 20). The category crisis characterizing the monster consists in the very essence of human subjectivity. As a liminal body, the Gothic monster, or in Hurley’s terms the abhuman body “that retains traces of human identity but has become, or is in the process of becoming, something quite different” threatens “the integrity of human identity,” while “occupying the space between the terms of such oppositions as human and beast, male and female, civilized and primitive” (Punter and Byron, 2004, p. 41). Characterization in Child of God capitalizes on both of the foregoing features in order to exert its parodic effect. McCarthy infuses Ballard with “the primitive, the barbaric, and the tabooed” (Punter, 1996a, p. 4) characteristic of Gothic monstrosity through animal imagery, sexual behaviour, as well as physical and psychological characterization. Animal imagery is used both to describe the physical features of the protagonist and convey his increasing alienation from human society.

Ballard’s life is crowded with animals. Throughout the novel, he keeps a household with all kinds of animals: spiders, crickets, snakes, dogs, cats, ﬁsh, doves, a robin, and even teddy bears and a stuffed tiger, which he won in a shooting contest at the country fair. At multiple points in the narrative, the narrator blends the protagonist’s subjectivity with animals and beasts using the Gothic element of grotesque exaggeration. Ballard is limned as “a misplaced and loveless simian shape” (p. 20), a “gargoyle,” which represents animal-human hybridity (p. 37), “a crazy winter gnome” (p. 83), “a crazed mountain troll” (p. 114), “a part-time ghoul” (p. 130), and even as an infra-animal “thing” (p. 88, p. 115).

At several points in the novel, Ballard visits a house belonging to a man named Ralph. There he meets a child named Billy, whom the narrator introduces as “a huge headed bald and slobbering primate that inhabited the lower reaches of the house” (p. 60; italics added) and could hardly be perceived as a child (p. 61). Ballard brings a robin for Billy and seems to understand him very well. In fact, the narrative suggests that there is an afﬁnity between Ballard and Billy, whose names also tellingly resemble one another. When Billy chews off the legs of the robin, Ballard remarks understandingly: “He wanted it to where it couldn’t run off” (p. 62). Analogously, Ballard murders people so that they can never run off and keep him company forever. Later on, Ballard observes afﬁrmatively, “Why that boy’s got good sense” (p. 87). It can, therefore, be argued that Billy mirrors the posthuman monstrosity of Ballard.

Accordingly, one of the categories that Ballard undermines is human/beast and human/animal.

Another category Ballard problematises is male/female. Apart from animal-like and beastly features associated with Ballard, his gender performance is incrementally blurred when his longtime habit of “wearing the underclothes of his female victims” develops into “appearing in their outerwear as well” (p. 107). The category crisis feeding into Ballard’s monstrosity and becoming posthuman is reasserted when he is described as a “gothic doll in illﬁt clothes, its carmine mouth ﬂoating detached and bright in the white landscape” (p. 107). Subsequently, when he confronts John Greer, Ballard is again “in frightwig and skirts” (p. 127). It will be additionally demonstrated that Ballard’s category crises are also degenerative as he gradually moves through regressive stages of the posthuman: becoming-animal, monster, thing, (living) corpse, and, ultimately, apparition. In that sense, posthumanism is portrayed as a kind of primitivism in the novel. As Austin Lillywhite also notes, like posthumanism, the “primitivist worldview disrupts the traditional Western category of a fully bounded, autonomous, white humanity that is opposed to an inert, passive materiality” (2018, p. 114). Thus, the ulterior logic shared by both “hinges on undoing binaries of inner/outer, person/thing; the result is a crisis of subjectivity, brought on by the desire for… the rank of brute thingness” (Lillywhite, 2018, p. 114). When this primitivism is conceived of as degenerative regression, it becomes a “gothic” discourse (Hurley, 1996, p. 65). The cynical nature of the Gothic, as also reﬂected in McCarthy’s novel, ampliﬁes the desire of the foregoing primitivism for “brute thingness” (Lillywhite, 2018, p. 114) and divests its transgressive tenor of its positive potentialities, suggesting that when primitive impulses and modes of existence remain “unchecked,” humans are apt to “perform acts of perversity than poetry” (Magistrale, 1996, p. 31). In this sense, the primitive regression of the protagonist from the paradigms of humanism into further entrapment in gross materiality and transgressive becoming—in accordance with the posthuman—recasts the process of becoming the liminal posthuman into a violent objectiﬁcation of the subject, which is itself a murderous act. In addition to the foregoing category crises, Ballard’s act of serial killing and his symbolic afﬁnity with corpses is another behaviour linking him to posthuman Gothic monstrosity. In that sense, Ballard recalls Frankenstein’s monster to some extent. According to Ashley Craig Lancaster, “McCarthy combines the tradition of the British Gothicism with the realism of American Gothicism to create an updated version of Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein” (132). Both Ballard and Frankenstein’s monster, Lancaster continues, are rejected companionship, ostracized by society, and subjected to a “system of social othering” (2008, p. 133), which fuels their process of becoming “degenerate” monsters (2008, p. 142). In particular, Ballard’s social alienation progresses to the point where his communion with animals increasingly lapses into a community of corpses, which seems to echo his own subversively posthuman mode of existence. Ballard takes a step further than Frankenstein’s monster and becomes a thoroughgoing necrophile in addition to being a serial killer. As pointed out by Punter, “Gothic ﬁction is erotic at root,” and sexual perversion is often the corollary of the repressed “Eros,” which “returns in the form of threat and violence” (1996b, p. 191). In Ballard’s case, the deviance involves the corpse, which carries several implications. According to Erin E. Edwards, “the corpse marks the cessation of rationalist control over the body, the moment when the socially deﬁned person is given over to biological forces, and the molar form of the human yields to the molecular processes of decomposition” (2018, p. 3).

As a result, the corpse is bound up in “a retrospective unraveling of the exclusionary category of the humanist subject, even as it imagines what comes ‘after’ this traditionally deﬁned human form” (Edwards, 2018, p. 3). At ﬁrst blush, Ballard’s exploitation of corpses may seem to reafﬁrm the liberal humanist subject’s treatment of the body “as an object for control and mastery rather than as an intrinsic part of the self” (Hayles, 1999, p. 5). This “Gothic commodiﬁcation” characterizing Gothic monstrosity “exploits the disconnect between genuine human connection and the need to control every aspect of the human victim, particularly the body after death” (Coughlin, 2015, p. 143). Nonetheless, Ballard’s underground monstrous dollhouse is a posthuman community intended for catering to his desperate need for companionship and integration. Ballard’s collection of corpses, in Vereen Bell’s terms, consist of “facsimile people” (1988, p. 61) assembled as compensation for Ballard’s social alienation and symbolic or “psychic death” (Jarrett, 1997, p. 44). As Jarrett notes, Ballard’s inhabitation of caves is itself “a form of self-entombment or life-in-death that mirrors the death-in-life of his corpses” (1997, p. 45). In other words, Ballard’s ostensible control over corpses through Gothic commodiﬁcation as a substitute for genuine human connection collapses into the subversion of the category of the humanist subject on account of his own identiﬁcation with the corpse as a symbol of the loss of rationalist control over the body. Death seems to be the only medium through which Ballard can ﬁnd a semblance of integration and companionship. He gradually tries to achieve integration by assembling a grotesque community of corpses, which corresponds to his own symbolic death. It does not stop there, however. Ballard’s dream of “riding to his death” could be construed as “a form of suicide: his inarticulate wish to join his true family composed of his dead father [who had committed suicide] and collection of corpses” (Jarrett, 1997, p. 42). It is only through his actual death that Ballard receives an ironic semblance of social assimilation, which proves to be yet another form of exclusion. In other words, he is temporarily incorporated into society only as a posthuman Other, namely a monstrous corpse, to be “laid out on a slab and ﬂayed, eviscerated, dissected” and after three months of class, “scraped from the table into a plastic bag and taken with others of his kind to a cemetery outside the city and here interred” (p. 145; italics added). Thus, the world of Child of God is a postmodern Gothic world where “the body is turned inside out— actually peeled open—as its organs are splayed, like negative photographic images, across the ﬁeld of a dead, relational power” (Kroker, 1987, p. 185). The Cartesian self implodes into a “dangling” subject in a body that alternates between “the frenzy of the schizoid ego and the inertia of hermeticism” with its organs hanging out (Kroker, 1987, p. 185). Accordingly, rather than conclude with “a certain practical accommodation between the hero and the social world around him” (Swales, 2015, p. 34), Ballard’s journey “terminate[s] in nothingness” (McCarthy, 1993, p. 138). Virtually none of the aspects involved in the identity formation of the typical protagonist in the Bildungsroman, which includes “the realization of the self, and, along with it, of various other aspects such as a sense of who one is, gender distinction, family and professional perspectives, social and interhuman status and role… communication and behaviour” (Golban 18) is achieved in the novel. As a result, the foiled entelechy of the humanist subject and his posthuman disintegration render the Bildungsroman phantasmatic in postmodern times.

It must also be noted that even the ironic closure afforded Ballard is precarious. On the surface, Ballard’s degenerative journey may seem conclusive. However, as Cohen points out, the monster “turns immaterial and vanishes, to reappear someplace else” (1996, p. 4) and “each time to be read against contemporary social movements or a speciﬁc, determining event” (1996, p. 5). Similarly, toward the end of the novel, Ballard catches a glimpse of a boy on a church bus, who uncannily “looked like himself” (p. 140), suggesting that others like him are bound to emerge. Later on, when “the four young students who bent over him like those haruspices of old perhaps saw monsters worse to come in their conﬁgurations” (p. 145), again it is implied that postmodern monsters akin to Ballard will most likely reappear. Thus, the sense of closure characteristic of the typical *Bildungsroman* is parodied in a synthesis of continuity—Ballard is dead and disposed of—and critical difference—other monsters will arise. The deep complicity between the Gothic and postmodernism in *Child of God* is predicated on the Gothic horror’s correspondence to the postmodern concern with the dissolution of human subjectivity and its dire consequences. Gothic elements are, therefore, utilized so as to advance postmodern parody in a bid to make a critical statement about the condition of human subjectivity in postmodern times, while voicing the horrors that stem from its disintegration. Accordingly, although *Child of God* portrays the failure and dissolution of the humanist subjectivity at the core of the *Bildungsroman* through postmodern parody, the image of the posthuman subjectivity it depicts as its successor is by no means afﬁrmatively positive. As Punter notes, the Gothic is “too tentative” and “hesitant” to categorically endorse a position (1996b, p. 191).

*Child of God* takes posthumanism back to its primitive origins in monstrous becomings by representing the vengeful reemergence of “the structural others of the modern humanistic subject” (Braidotti, 2013, p. 37) in a postmodern Gothic context. In other words, by equating the posthuman with a monstrosity, the novel undercuts any self-congratulatory celebration of a chaotic, liminal, and uncategorizable mode of existence. The foregoing demarcates the point at which the Gothic and postmodernism depart from posthumanism in their insistence on the horrors of the faltering status of Man. Whereas posthumanism seeks to avoid the postmodern collapse into “the rhetoric of the crisis of Man” (Braidotti, 2013, p. 37) by salvaging a new alternative with a celebratory air following the dethronement of the discourse of humanism, the Gothic maps onto the “postmodern fear of the disintegration of the human subject” (Bolton, 2014, p. 2) while pointing “implicitly and constantly to the insupportability of the accepted alternatives” (Punter, 1996b, p. 191). Therefore, it can be concluded that the primary source of horror in *Child of God* as a postmodern Gothic novel resides in “the uncertainty of what we will become and what will be left of us after the change” or dissolution of the human subjectivity (Bolton, 2014, p. 3). The fusion of the Gothic and postmodernism in *Child of God* represents a controversial mode of writing along the lines of what Beville dubs “a literary monster” (2009, p. 16), which mirrors its own protagonist. Accordingly, as “a literary monster” that parodies the tradition of the *Bildungsroman*, *Child of God* voices the harrowing fears that engulf the situation of human subjectivity in postmodern times by engendering a “dark and mutant” posthuman monster (McCarthy, 1993, p. 118), who ultimately fails to achieve positive self-knowledge, self-realization, social integration, and companionship and succumbs, instead, to incomprehension, alienation, and indeterminacy.
